---
title: "Passman: Desktop Applications with Scala"
github: https://github.com/leeavital/passman
date: 2017-07-09
tags: scala programming
layout: post
---

A few months ago I decided to finally start using a password manager. Partly
out of wanting to make life more convenient and partly because of a
particularly long chain of mass password leaks that had happened that month. 

So I set out to look for good password manager. I wasn't thrilled with all
of the options out there. The open-source options out there tend to have poor
cross-platform support, often requiring unofficial clients for browser, and
non-linux support. And the two commercial offerings I was familiar with, don't offer lifetime licences
and instead ask for a monthly subscription rate.  Blech.

So I decided to write my own.

*If any security minded folks are reading this and shuddering at the prospect,
never fear! While this wound up being an interesting project, I ultimately
ended up using a commercial password manager.*

Portability was an explicit goal of this enterprise, and I enjoy writing Scala, so that's the platform I decided upon.

This post won't talk much about security. I used the standard, built-in
password based encryption that ships with the JDK. Rather, this will be about
some new (at least to me) Scala-isms.

## 1. Writing a custom DSL to reduce JavaFX boilerplate

Before this, the only UI programming I had done is a JVM language was toy
programs in Swing for school.  JavaFX, as best as I can tell, is an evolution
of Swing with better APIs. But even with it's better APIs, it still retains the
big awkwardness of the Swing APIs.

You can find yourself writng code that looks like:

```java
Text t = new Text();
t.setText("hello")
t.setFontSize(14);
```

So the first thing I did was write some implicit classes to at least reduce the amount of typing to:

```scala
text("hello") withFontSize (14)
```

The accompanying library code looks something like this:

```scala

// in FxUtils.scala
trait Fontable[T] {
  def withFontSize(i: Double): T
}

implicit class FontableText(txt: Text) extends Fontable[Text] {
  def withFontSize(i: Double): Text = {
    txt.setFont(Font.font(i))
      txt
  }
}

def text(label: String): Text = {
  new Text(label)
}
```

You can attach event handlers in the same way. So this fairly verbose code in Java 8:

```java
Button p = new Button();
p.setText("click me")
p.addEventHandler((e) -> /* do something */);
```

Became:

```scala
button("click on") onClick( () => /* do something */ )
```

But the most bang-for-my buck extension was with layout code.

Laying out a Grid in code, using the Java API looks something like this:

```java
Grid g = new Grid();
g.add(0, 0, topLeftComponent);
g.add(0, 1, bottomLeftComponent);
g.add(1, 0, topRightComponent);
g.add(1, 1, bottomRightComponent);
```

And with my DSL it became:

```scala
layoutRows(
  Seq(topLeftComponent, topRightComponent),
  Seq(bottomLeftComponent, bottomRightComponent),
)
```

I found that it became easier to manipulate the UI in code when I was
describing the UI in this more declarative manner. Since everything was an
expression, and each view was subsequently one large nested expression, the
compiler would prevent me from creating a widget and forgetting to hook it into
anything.  There was also less opportunity for sloppy copy-pasting that would
make me attach an event handler to the wrong widget.

## 2. Rolling a custom monad for domain specific logic

As I made progress, I found that I was writing lots of repetitive code to deal with the same few error conditions.

At first I tried using the Scala built-ins that are touted as replacements for
Java-style exceptions. `Optional`s threw away too much information, and I found
that I wound up writing lots of code and rolling lots of bespoke error types to
get `Either` to work -- I needed the left-hand side to be a rich datatype to
describe the error.

This led me to write my own Monadic container for data. Each UI activity
invariably wound up touching a password-encrypted "vault" file, so I wound up calling
this type `Secure[T]` -- I'm not crazy about the name though.


`Secure[T]` is capable of describing several error states --- a corrupted
vault-file was found, some IO failed, or password verification failed.

Let's take a simple example. Say I modelled my data like this:

```scala
type VaultContents = Set[VaultEntry]

case class VaultEntry(label: String, username: string, password: string)
```

I can write functions that are meant to be called from a view with the following signatures:

```scala
/**
 * finds an entry, if it exists, in the vault file
 */
def findEntry(vault: VaultContents, label: String): Optional[VaultEntry]

/**
 * Finds any entries where passwords are used twice.
 */
def findDuplicatePasswords(vault: VaultContents): Set[VaultEntry]

/**
 * overwrites or appends a new entry to the contents of the vault
 */
def addEntry(vault: VaultContents, entry: VaultEntry): VaultContents
```

I also need functions to read and write the vault to disk:

```scala
/**
 * Reads the contents of `location` and decrypts using the master password.
 */
def readContents(masterPassword: String ,location: File): Secure[VaultContents]

/**
 * Writes the vault to a given location, encrypting with master password
 */
def writeContents(
  masterPassword: String, 
  location: File,
  contents: VaultContents): Secure[Unit]
```


At every callsite, we need to handle the possibilies I listed above -- bad password, corrupted file, etc.

In Java land, we would use checked exceptions. In Scala, we can call those
functions in a for-comprehension to make sure those errors get propagated.  For
example, here's a function that reads the vault file, finds the password for a
given labl, and copies it to the users clipboard.

```scala
def copyPassword(label: String, masterPassword: String) = {
  val result : Secure[Optional[String]] = for {
    contents <-   readContents(masterPassword, vaultLocation) // returns Secure[VaultContents]
    entry = findEntry(contents)
  } yield entry.map(_.password)

  result match {
    case Ok(Some(entry)) =>
      copyEntryToClipboard(entry)
    case Ok(None) =>
      ui.errorMessage("password does not exist!")
    case BadPassword =>
      ui.errorMessage("bad vault password")
    case CorruptedFile(error) =>
      ui.errorMessage("vault file was corrupted: " + e)
    }
}
```


This wound up being a pretty nice way of passing around error states. This let
me write lots of code paths that did some password-verified vault operation low
in the call stack, and plenty of application logic further up the stack.  The
application logic was largely written to be unaware of `Secure[T]`, and for
comprehensions handled threading any possible failures all the way up my
controllers, where I was calling these functions.
