---
title: Chaotic Discussions and Writing More
date: 2017-07-03
tags: miscellaneous
layout: post
---

I've recently decided that I'm going to write more. As school is becoming more
and more of a distant memory, and my professional interactions become more
contextual and face-to-face, I find that I need to express complete, complex
ideas in writing less and less.

The instantaneous nature of instant messengers and to a lesser extent email,
leads to a style of discussion where ideas emerge out of noise instead of
first-principles. One person says something wild; someone else disagrees; the
first person defends their wild thing; and an idea get refined until everyone is
happy, or everyone is exhausted from all the back-and-forth.

This can be exhilarating and has lead me to good and interesting ideas. Good
things can come out of lively disagreements. But more insidiously, it's all too
easy to get into a habit of throwing an 80% fleshed out idea, and hoping the
other 20% emerges from the chaos.

Writing on the other hand, forces you to disagree with yourself. To get your
ideas to 100%. To find and confront all of the inconsistencies in your argument
yourself. There's less ego, as you're less likely to disagree with one of your
own points on personal grounds.  You can, for the most part, look at the page
and draw the logical lines between every point you're making. Like those chains
of proofs from school, you can be sure that even if what you wrote doesn't all
fit in your head, you can start reading at the first sentence and arrive at the
final point through a series of logical steps.

You can re-order your thoughts, in a way you can't do in conversation. At the
time of writing this sentence, for example, I had already deleted two paragraphs above this
one because they didn't make sense!

What's troubling is that I've found that my writing skills have atrophied. As the
need to express fully formed ideas becomes less and less, and the need to thrive
in the chaos of ideas found in most software engineering shops increases, I
find that my ability to clearly write down complex ideas has gotten less and
less.

The point I'm trying to make is that anecdotally writing forces me to think in a
way that conversation doesn't.  And that's why I'm determined to write more.

I'm not sure what I'll write about.

In the past, everything on this blog has been about my various programming
projects. I don't have quite as much time as I used to, and I can't dive deeply
into a technical subject and then write about it fast enough to keep pace with
how much writing I want to do. At the same time, this is my first post since
2014! So I've got a solid backlog of half-finished projects to work through. So we'll see.

Until then.
